jātasya dhruvakula eva tuṅgakīrte-
raṅgasya vyajani suta: sa venanāmā |
yaddoṣavyathitamati: sa rājavarya-
stvatpāde nihitamanā vanaṃ gato'bhūt ||1||
jātasya dhruvakule-eva	who was born in the line of Dhruva itself
tuṅga-kīrte:-aṅgasya	to Anga of great fame
vyajani suta: sa vena-nāmā	was born the son named Vena
yat-doṣa-vyathita-mati:	saddened by whose evil deeds
sa: rājavarya:-	that noble king
tvat-pāde nihita-manā	with his mind fixed on Thy feet
vanaṃ gata:-abhūt	took to the forest
In the line of Dhruva was the very famous king Anga whose son was Vena. Distressed at the evil nature of his son, the noble king took to the forest with his mind fixed on Thy lotus feet alone.
pāpo'pi kṣititalapālanāya vena:
paurādyairupanihita: kaṭhoravīrya: |
sarvebhyo nijabalameva sampraśaṃsan
bhūcakre tava yajanānyayaṃ nyarautsīt ||2||
pāpa:-api	though evil minded
kṣiti-tala-pālanāya	for the governance of the country
vena: paurādyai:-upanihita:	by the leading citizens, Vena was made the king
kaṭhora-vīrya:	being of very great prowess
sarvebhya: nija-balam-eva	to all his might alone
sampraśaṃsan	boasting about
bhūcakre	all over the earth
tava yajanāni-	sacrifices to Thee
ayaṃ nyarautsīt	prohibited
Though evil minded, Vena who was of great prowess was made the king by the leading citizens for the governance of the country. He always boasted of his strength and prohibited the practice of all forms of Thy worship and sacrifices.
samprāpte hitakathanāya tāpasaughe
matto'nyo bhuvanapatirna kaścaneti |
tvannindāvacanaparo munīśvaraistai:
śāpāgnau śalabhadaśāmanāyi vena: ||3||
samprāpte	approaching him
hitakathanāya	to advise him in regard to right conduct
tāpasa-aughe	when a group of sages
matta:-anya: bhuvanapati:-na kaścan-iti	other than me there is no lord of the earth saying thus
tvat-nindā-vacana-para:	indulging in defaming Thee
munīśvarai:-tai:	by those great sages
śāpa-agnau	in the fire of their curse
śalabha-daśām-anāyi	was destroyed like a moth
vena:	Vena
When a group of sages approached him to advise him as to the right conduct, he indulged in abusing Thee declaring that there was no other ruler on the earth other than himself. The enraged sages cursed him. In the flame of the curse Vena was destroyed like a moth.
tannāśāt khalajanabhīrukairmunīndrai-
stanmātrā ciraparirakṣite tadaṅge |
tyaktāghe parimathitādathorudaṇḍā-
ddordaṇḍe parimathite tvamāvirāsī: ||4||
tat-nāśāt	because of his death
khalajana-bhīrukai:- munīndrai:-	afraid of the wicked people, the great sages
tat-mātrā ciraparirakṣite tat-aṅge	from his body preserved by his mother for a long time
tyakta-aghe	removed sins
parimathitāt-atha-urudaṇḍāt-	by churning his thighs
dordaṇḍe parimathite	then (when) the hands (were) being churned
tvam-āvirāsīt	Thou manifested Thyself
After his destruction, the sages feared that the absence of a ruler would lead to the tyranny of wicked people. So they took the body of Vena from his mother who had preserved it for a long time and churned the thighs. Thus his body became sinless. Then when his arms were churned, from there Thou appeared (in the form of Prithu).
vikhyāta: pṛthuriti tāpasopadiṣṭai:
sūtādyai: pariṇutabhāvibhūrivīrya: |
venārtyā kabalitasampadaṃ dharitrī-
mākrāntāṃ nijadhanuṣā samāmakārṣī: ||5||
vikhyāta: pṛthu-iti	famous as Prithu
tāpasa-upadiṣṭai:	thus being advised by the great sages
sūta-ādyai:	the minstrels and others
pariṇuta-bhāvi-bhūri-vīrya:	sang in praise of Thy future achievements
vena-ārtyā	tormented by Vena
kabalita-sampadaṃ dharitrīm-	the earth who had withdrawn her resources into her interior
ākrāntām nija-dhanuṣā	was attacked by Thy arrow
samām-akārṣī	(and was) made even
This was the famous incarnation of Thee as Prithu, the sages declared thus. The minstrels and others sang in praise of Thy future achievements. The Earth who had withdrawn all her resources into her interior because of the oppression of Vena, was attacked by Thy bow and arrow, and was made to yield back the resources.
bhūyastāṃ nijakulamukhyavatsayuktyai-
rdevādyai: samucitacārubhājaneṣu |
annādīnyabhilaṣitāni yāni tāni
svacchandaṃ surabhitanūmadūduhastvam ||6||
bhūya:-tāṃ	then the earth
nija-kula-mukhya-vatsa-yuktai:-	with the leader of each group as the calf
deva-ādyai:	by the gods and others
samucita-cāru-bhājaneṣu	in appropriate special vessels
annādīni-abhilaṣitāni	food and other things as desired
yāni tāni	this and that
svacchandaṃ	unhesitatingly
surabhi-tanūm	(the earth) in the form of Surabhi (the celestial cow)
adūduha: tvam	Thou milked
Thou then made the gods and other species of beings to freely milk the Earth who had become like the celestial cow Surabhi. The leaders of the different groups of gods and others acted as calves milking their desired requirements in appropriate special vessels.
ātmānaṃ yajati makhaistvayi tridhāma-
nnārabdhe śatatamavājimedhayāge |
spardhālu: śatamakha etya nīcaveṣo
hṛtvā'śvaṃ tava tanayāt parājito'bhūt ||7||
ātmānaṃ yajati makhai:-tvayi	as Thou were sacrificing to Thyself by Yanjyas
tridhāman-	O Lord of the three worlds!
ārabdhe śatatama-vāji-medha-yāge	(and) at the starting of the hundredth Ashwamedha Yanjya
spardhālu śatamakha:	jealous Indra
etya nīcaveṣa:	came as a barbarian
hṛtvā-aśvaṃ	stealing away the horse
tava tanayāt	by Thy son
parājita:-abhūt	was defeated
O Lord of the three worlds! As Thou (as Prithu) were performing sacrifices to Thyself, and were to begin the hundredth Ashwamedha Yanjya, Indra became jealous. In the guise of a lowly person he stole the Yanjya horse. He was then defeated by Thy son (Vijitashwana).
devendraṃ muhuriti vājinaṃ harantaṃ
vahnau taṃ munivaramaṇḍale juhūṣau |
rundhāne kamalabhave krato: samāptau
sākṣāttvaṃ madhuripumaikṣathā: svayaṃ svam ||8||
devendraṃ muhu:-iti	Indra again and again thus
vājinaṃ harantaṃ	who was stealing the horse
vahnau taṃ	in the fire, him
munivara-maṇḍale juhūṣau	when the sages were about to offer as oblation
rundhāne kamalabhave	prevented by Brahma
krato: samāptau	at the end of the Yanjya
sākṣāt-tvaṃ	Thou in front of Thee (Prithu)
madhuripum-aikṣathā:	saw Madhuripu (Maha Vishnu)
svayaṃ svam	Thyself Thou
Indra who was again and again trying to steal the sacrificial horse, was about to be offered into the fire by the sacrificing sages, but they were restrained to do so by Brahmaa. When the sacrifice was completed Thou as Prithu saw Thyself manifested in Thy real form as Vishnu, the slayer of the demon Madhu.
taddattaṃ varamupalabhya bhaktimekāṃ
gaṅgānte vihitapada: kadāpi deva |
satrasthaṃ muninivahaṃ hitāni śaṃsa-
nnaikṣiṣṭhā: sanakamukhān munīn purastāt ||9||
tat-dattaṃ varam-upalabhya	getting a boon given by Him
bhaktim-ekāṃ	firm devotion
gaṅgā-ante vihita-pada: kadāpi	on the banks of Gangaa having established residence, once
deva	O Lord!
satrasthaṃ muni-nivahaṃ	to the group of sages who were doing Yanjya
hitāni śaṃsan-	preaching spiritual welfare
aikṣiṣṭhā:	(Thou as Prithu) saw
sanaka-mukhān munīn purastāt	the sages Sanaka and others in front
O Lord! After getting firm devotion alone as a boon from Him (Vishnu), Thou established Thy residence on the banks of Gangaa. Once as Thou were expounding Dharma to the sages who had assembled there for Yanjya, Thou saw the Sanaka and other sages before Thee.
vijñānaṃ sanakamukhoditaṃ dadhāna:
svātmānaṃ svayamagamo vanāntasevī |
tattādṛkpṛthuvapurīśa satvaraṃ me
rogaughaṃ praśamaya vātagehavāsin ||10||
vijñānaṃ	the (ultimate) knowledge
sanaka-mukha-uditaṃ	imparted by Sanaka and the other sages
dadhāna:	receiving
sva-ātmānaṃ svayam-agama:	Thou attained Thy own self
vana-anta-sevī	living in the forest
tat-tādṛk-pṛthu-vapu:-īśa	O Lord! Of such nature embodied as Prithu!
satvaraṃ me	hastily my
rogaughaṃ	all ailments
praśamaya	eradicate
vātagehavāsin	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Receiving the ultimate knowledge imparted by Sanaka and other sages, and living in the forest, Thou realised Thy own self. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who embodied Thyself as Prithu! Be pleased to quickly cure me of all my ailments.